.\" Manpage for json-gen-c.
.\" Contact liaotonglang@gmail.com to correct errors or typos.
.TH json\-gen\-c 1 "15 Mar 2026" "v0.9.0" "json-gen-c man page"
.SH NAME
json\-gen\-c \- generate C code for JSON serialization and deserialization
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B json\-gen\-c
.B \-in
.I input_file
.RB [ \-out
.IR output_dir ]
.RB [ \-\-format
.IR json | msgpack ]
.br
.B json\-gen\-c
.BR \-h | \-\-help
.br
.B json\-gen\-c
.BR \-v | \-\-version
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B json\-gen\-c
reads a schema definition file (\f[C].json\-gen\-c\f[R]) containing
struct, enum, and oneof declarations and generates C source code to
serialize (marshal) C structs to JSON and deserialize (unmarshal) JSON
back to C structs.
.PP
The generated code supports nested structs, enums, tagged unions
(oneof), dynamic and fixed\-size arrays, key\-value maps, optional and
nullable fields, JSON field aliases, default values, and precise\-width
integer types.
.SH SCHEMA SYNTAX
Schema files use a C\-like syntax with additional keywords.
Comments are supported in both \f[C]//\f[R] single\-line and
\f[C]/* */\f[R] multi\-line forms.
.SS Struct Definitions
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
struct Person {
    int id;
    sstr_t name;
    Address addr;
}
\f[R]
.fi
.PP
Structs may reference other structs and enums defined in the same
file or brought in via \f[C]#include\f[R].
The trailing semicolon after the closing brace is optional.
.SS Enum Definitions
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
enum Color { RED, GREEN, BLUE }
\f[R]
.fi
.PP
Enum values are marshaled as JSON strings (e.g. \f[C]"GREEN"\f[R]) and
unmarshaled from either strings or integers.
Generated C constants are prefixed with the enum name
(e.g. \f[C]Color_RED\f[R], \f[C]Color_GREEN\f[R]).
.SS Tagged Unions (oneof)
Tagged unions (discriminated unions) represent a value that can be one
of several variant types, identified by a tag field in JSON:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
oneof Shape {
    @tag "type"
    Circle circle;
    Rectangle rectangle;
}
\f[R]
.fi
.PP
\f[C]@tag "field"\f[R] sets the JSON discriminator key (defaults to
\f[C]"type"\f[R] if omitted).
Each variant references a previously defined struct.
.PP
JSON uses a flattened representation where the tag and variant fields
are at the same level:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
{"type":"circle","radius":5.0}
\f[R]
.fi
.PP
Generated C code uses an enum for the tag and a union for variant
storage.
Oneof types can be used as scalar fields, dynamic arrays, and
fixed\-size arrays in structs.
.SS Field Types
The following scalar types are supported:
.IP \[bu] 2
\f[C]int\f[R], \f[C]long\f[R], \f[C]float\f[R], \f[C]double\f[R],
\f[C]bool\f[R], \f[C]sstr_t\f[R] (dynamic string)
.IP \[bu] 2
Precise\-width integers:
\f[C]int8_t\f[R], \f[C]int16_t\f[R], \f[C]int32_t\f[R],
\f[C]int64_t\f[R], \f[C]uint8_t\f[R], \f[C]uint16_t\f[R],
\f[C]uint32_t\f[R], \f[C]uint64_t\f[R]
.IP \[bu] 2
Struct names (for nested structs)
.IP \[bu] 2
Enum names
.IP \[bu] 2
Oneof names (tagged unions)
.SS Arrays
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
int scores[];       // dynamic array (heap\-allocated)
int fixed[10];      // fixed\-size array (inline, no length field)
\f[R]
.fi
.PP
Dynamic arrays generate a companion \f[C]<name>_len\f[R] field and are
heap\-allocated during unmarshal.
Fixed\-size arrays are stored inline in the struct.
.SS Maps
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
map<sstr_t, int> scores;
map<sstr_t, Person> people;
\f[R]
.fi
.PP
Maps are represented as JSON objects.
The key type is always \f[C]sstr_t\f[R]; the value type can be any
scalar, enum, or struct type.
Maps may also be arrayed: \f[C]map<sstr_t, int> m[];\f[R]
.SS Optional and Nullable Fields
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
optional sstr_t nickname;              // omitted from JSON if unset
nullable int score;                    // can be JSON null
optional nullable sstr_t middle_name;  // both behaviors
\f[R]
.fi
.PP
Optional fields generate a companion \f[C]bool has_<name>\f[R] flag.
When \f[C]has_<name>\f[R] is false, the field is omitted in marshal
output.
Nullable fields accept JSON \f[C]null\f[R] on unmarshal.
.SS JSON Field Alias
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
@json "user_name"
sstr_t username;
\f[R]
.fi
.PP
The \f[C]@json\f[R] annotation sets the JSON key used during marshal
and unmarshal.  The C struct member name is unchanged.
.SS Default Values
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
int count = 42;
sstr_t label = "hello";
float ratio = 3.14;
bool active = true;
Color color = GREEN;       // enum default
int neg = \-10;             // negative numbers
\f[R]
.fi
.PP
Default values are applied in the generated \f[C]_init()\f[R] function.
Supported for all scalar types, strings, and enums.
Not supported for arrays, maps, or struct fields.
Enum defaults are validated against declared enum constants.
.SS Include Directive
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
#include "other_schema.json\-gen\-c"
\f[R]
.fi
.PP
Includes another schema file.
Types defined in included files are available for use as field types.
.SS Comments
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
// single\-line comment
/* multi\-line
   comment */
\f[R]
.fi
.SH GENERATED FILES
Running \f[B]json\-gen\-c\f[R] produces four files in the output
directory:
.IP \[bu] 2
\f[C]json.gen.h\f[R] \(en header with struct/enum/oneof definitions and
function declarations.
.IP \[bu] 2
\f[C]json.gen.c\f[R] \(en implementation of all generated functions.
.IP \[bu] 2
\f[C]sstr.h\f[R], \f[C]sstr.c\f[R] \(en string helper library required
by generated code.
.SH GENERATED API
For each struct \f[C]T\f[R] the following functions are generated:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
// Initialize struct (applies default values)
int T_init(struct T *obj);

// Free dynamic memory owned by struct
int T_clear(struct T *obj);

// Marshal struct to compact JSON
int json_marshal_T(struct T *obj, sstr_t out);

// Marshal struct to indented JSON
int json_marshal_indent_T(struct T *obj,
    int indent, int curindent, sstr_t out);

// Marshal array of structs to JSON
int json_marshal_array_T(struct T *obj, int len,
    sstr_t out);

// Unmarshal JSON to struct
int json_unmarshal_T(sstr_t in, struct T *obj);

// Unmarshal JSON array to heap\-allocated array
int json_unmarshal_array_T(sstr_t in,
    struct T **obj, int *len);

// Generated top\-level field indices
enum T_field_index {
    T_FIELD_name = 0,
    ...
    T_FIELD_COUNT = N
};

// Number of uint64_t words needed for the field mask
#define T_FIELD_MASK_WORD_COUNT ...

// Selectively unmarshal chosen top\-level fields
int json_unmarshal_selected_T(sstr_t in,
    struct T *obj,
    const uint64_t *field_mask,
    int field_mask_word_count);
\f[R]
.fi
.PP
All functions return 0 on success.
The caller must call \f[C]T_init()\f[R] before use and
\f[C]T_clear()\f[R] after use to avoid memory leaks.
For \f[C]json_unmarshal_array_T()\f[R], the caller must also
\f[C]free()\f[R] the returned array pointer.
.PP
Selective unmarshal masks are built with the generated helper macros:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
JSON_GEN_C_FIELD_MASK_SET(mask_words, field_index);
JSON_GEN_C_FIELD_MASK_CLEAR(mask_words, field_index);
JSON_GEN_C_FIELD_MASK_TEST(mask_words, field_index);
\f[R]
.fi
.PP
For \f[C]json_unmarshal_selected_T()\f[R]:
.IP \[bu] 2
Passing \f[C]NULL\f[R] or too few mask words returns an error.
.IP \[bu] 2
Unselected top\-level fields remain unchanged.
.IP \[bu] 2
Selected fields present in the JSON input replace the old stored field
value as a whole field.
.IP \[bu] 2
Selecting a nested struct / oneof / array / map field replaces that
top\-level field; there is no nested field mask in this first version.
.IP \[bu] 2
Field indices use generated C member names even when \f[C]@json\f[R]
aliases rename the JSON keys.
.SH USAGE EXAMPLE
Create a schema file \f[C]user.json\-gen\-c\f[R]:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
enum Role { ADMIN, USER, GUEST }

struct User {
    int id;
    sstr_t name;
    Role role = USER;
    optional sstr_t email;
    int scores[];
}
\f[R]
.fi
.PP
Generate the code and use it in your program:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
json\-gen\-c \-in user.json\-gen\-c \-out .

// In your C code:
#include "json.gen.h"

struct User u;
User_init(&u);          // u.role == Role_USER
u.id = 1;
u.name = sstr("Alice");

sstr_t out = sstr_new();
json_marshal_User(&u, out);
// out contains: {"id":1,"name":"Alice","role":"USER","scores":[]}

User_clear(&u);
sstr_free(out);
\f[R]
.fi
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-in " input_file"
Specify the input schema definition file.  Required.
.TP
.BI \-out " output_dir"
Specify the output directory for generated files.
Defaults to the current directory if not specified.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display a help message and exit.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Display the version number and exit.
.TP
.BI \-\-format " format"
Select output serialization format.
.B json
(default) generates JSON marshal/unmarshal code.
.B msgpack
generates MessagePack binary pack/unpack code.
.TP
.BI \-\-check\-compat " old_schema new_schema"
Compare two schema files and report compatibility.
Prints safe changes (additions, deprecations) and breaking changes
(removals, type changes) to stdout.
Exits 0 if only safe changes, 1 if any breaking changes, 2 on error.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B non\-zero
An error occurred (invalid arguments, parse error, validation error,
or file I/O error).
Diagnostic messages are printed to stderr in a clang\-style format
showing filename, line, column, and a source snippet.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2022\-2026 Liao Tonglang.
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later
<https://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>.
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.SH AUTHOR
Liao Tonglang (liaotonglang@gmail.com)
